Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




    PawMatch




          By

 Sienna Sisodia
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




              Problem definition + Stakeholders
According to BBC On average, the RSPCA received 374 reports of animal cruelty everyday in
June to August 2024. The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (RSPCA)
received 34,401 cruelty reports between June and August 2024, up from 25,887 in the same
period the year before (BBC, 2024). These statistics show us how the amount of mistreated
animals is increasing each year. I want to help reduce the likelihood of an animal receiving
mistreatment from its owner.


My client is a friend at St Dominics called Matilde, who has a part time job looking after
animals when their owners are away. She looks after a range of different animals from dogs
and cats to chickens. We have various conversations about her work where she has made me
aware how common it is for animals to be in unsafe environments, where signs of neglect are
seen from the owners.


I aim to make an adoption management system which is aimed at adoption agencies but made
specifically for one adoption agency, which will allow the staff to manage the animals up for
adoption and their personal details and will allow any potential rescuers to see if they are
suitable to adopt an animal.


Adoption agency staff are a key stakeholder for this project. This application will have a private
part using an admin login for staff and requires an interface to allow them to interact with this
software. This will contain details of all the animals and it will allow the staff to delete, modify,
edit and add different animals and I will aim to also include queries from possible rescuers.
They will also be able to view compatibility scores generated by the system when evaluating
potential adopters. This system should reduce the amount of manual administration required
and allows for a consistent form of assessing potential applicants.
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465



Another key stakeholder is potential adopters who are the primary users of this system. Their
experience with animals may vary significantly, ranging from first time pet owners to
experienced animal carers. They will be using the public side accessed by a user's own logins
stored within a large database, with hashing in order to keep the passwords safe if the
database is breached. My system will also require a simple and intuitive interface allowing
them to browse available animals, view information about each animal and complete an
adoption questionnaire. This system will gather user information which will be processed by a
compatibility scoring algorithm which will rank the right animals according to their suitability.


Another possible stakeholder is the animals. Although animals do not directly interact with the
system, they are an important stakeholder as they are affected by the outcome of adoption
decisions. This system's key aim is to improve animal welfare by encouraging more informed
adoption choices and reducing likelihood of animals being placed in unsuitable homes.


Due to my clients experience caring for a variety of animals, she is skilled and knowledgeable
about the environments required for an animal to live happily and safely and has asked me to
incorporate the compatibility matcher with questions and a set criteria to examine whether
they are suitable. Examples of the set criteria may include: the amount of available living space,
access to a garden, experience with animals, income and more. Her feedback will be used
throughout development to ensure the system meets the needs of animal welfare
professionals.


Although many adoption websites allow users to browse animals, they often rely on their own
judgement whether or not they are fit to adopt. This may lead to adoptions where the owner
does not fully understand the commitment required which may lead to neglect. In some cases,
unsuitable adoptions may result in animals being returned to shelters, creating additional
pressure on adoption agencies and causing unnecessary stress for animals involved. This
application should provide guidance whether a particular animal is compatible with their
lifestyle, living arrangements, financial situation or previous experience. Additionally, current
adoption agencies may use manual assessments and application forms by staff to which this
may be timeconsuming and influenced by subjective judgement. My system will differ as it
provides a consistent method of evaluating applicants through a scoring algorithm.
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




                      Use of Computational Methods
The most suitable solution for a problem like this is to create a computer based adoption
matching system. This is because the problem includes storing animal data, adopter
information, comparing different factors and producing recommendations. A manual system
may require staff to compare each adopter with each animal individually, which could take
significantly longer and will require more effort. Using a manual way of storing data may also
lead to inconsistencies, missing information and errors, whereas using a database allows data
to be searched efficiently and stored consistently. A computational solution allows this
problem to be solved more efficiently by using algorithms, data validation, automated scoring
and ensuring consistent data handling


Thinking Abstractly
The process of abstraction is removing unnecessary details in order to simplify the approach of
a problem, making it easier to understand and solve. Ignoring insignificant details will reduce
the amount of unnecessary coding and make the system easier to maintain. Within my system,
it will be used in order to focus specifically on matching an adopter with an animal.
For example, the system does not need to store every detail about an adopter's personal life. It
will only need to collect information that affects animal suitability such as the living space,
garden access, experience with animals. Similarly, with the animal profiles it will only store
useful information. It won't include its nicknames, or minor habits or favourite toy as this is not
as important for the matching system.
This will make the system easier to design and implement as irrelevant details are ignored.
This will also make the system more efficient by focusing on the most important factors that
affect suitability.



Thinking Ahead
During the development of this system I will need to think ahead in order to identify the
requirements of my user and relate to the issues they might face or be facing.
I have to anticipate how users would like their information to be presented in order to attract
them to adopting an animal, it must also be fully accessible and easy to use.
I will also need to plan how the data will be stored before implementation. For example,
animal records and adopter records must be stored persistently so information is not lost when
the program closes. I will also need to consider validation as users should not be able to leave
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

empty fields or enter invalid data. This will help ensure that the matching algorithm is using
accurate and correct information.
I will also need to think about the structures and designs that can be reused on different pages
before I start developing my project. I also have to consider the technologies I will use to
develop my system, as there are many different technologies I can use with each their own
pros and cons.
Another key part of my system to which I will need to think ahead is the compatibility scoring
system. This system should not simply recommend animals based on experience or breed.
Instead it should compare multiple factors such as living space, experience, time available,
children and animal requirements.


Thinking Concurrently
Processing multiple tasks at once will reduce the processing time of my app, reduce waiting
time for my user and increase the overall efficiency of my system. When the user completes
the adoption questionnaire, the system may need to retrieve animal records, compare the
adopter answers with requirements, calculate compatibility scores and display results.
It is also important within the login page, where the credentials that are entered need to be
validated and sanitised to prevent any injection attacks, whilst finding user profile. After this
stage is cleared, multiple elements will need to be loaded at the same time.
The system also needs to be able to handle different users carrying out tasks at the same time.
For example, an adopter could be viewing suitable animal matches while an admin user
updates or adds an animal profile. I will need to design the system so these processes are
independent and the data is able to remain consistent.
Concurrency may not be a main focus of my project, but it will allow me to design a system
which is responsive and efficient as more animal records and adopter applications are added.



Thinking Procedurally with Decomposition
Decomposition is the process of splitting a large process into small more manageable sections.
This will make the system easier to design, implement, test and improve. Instead of trying to
build the whole system at once, I can separate it into different components.
The main components which build up my system will include animal records with their
different cards, the adopter questionnaire with the matching algorithm, compatibility score
calculation, results page, validation and the admin control page. The animal records section
will store details about each animal and the adopters questionnaire collects information about
users home and lifestyle. The matching algorithm will compare adopter answers with each
animal's requirements and calculate compatibility score.
                          Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

I will also split the application into the front end and back end sections. The front end is what
the user or the admin user will experience, which will have the login forms and present the
different features of the application. The backend is where all the logic will be processed and
will include a relational database for secure storage of user data.
By using decomposition on my system it will allow each section to be developed and tested
separately. For example, I can first test whether the animal records are being stored and added
correctly, and if all the information is shown in the correct format. I can then test whether the
adopter questionnaire collects all the information required and validates the inputs. Then I can
test whether the matching algorithm calculates scores correctly. This way of testing will make
errors easier to identify and fix.
Procedural thinking will allow me to further separate each function of front and backend and
allow me to design my application using modules of reusable and readable code. The different
subprograms will be kept in their own areas so I can work on them without affecting other
areas. I will use this method in both the front and back ends of this project.




Thinking Logically
My program needs to be designed to make it simple to use but also logical to follow. This is
important as users are guided through the adoption process clearly, from logging in to
receiving suitable animal recommendations.
My system should hopefully follow a sequential process, for the user to view:
    1.​ User creates an account or logs in using username and password
    2.​ Once logins, users directed to main page, with the animals
    3.​ The adopter will then complete a questionnaire
    4.​ A compatibility score is shown for animals, and ranked from suitable to least suitable
        and the user can browse.


For the admin to view:
    1.​ Admin user will login in using their username and passwords
    2.​ The user will be directed to the admin control page
    3.​ The animal is able to add, edit or delete records similar to a CRUD interface.
    4.​ The system will validate the animal record to make sure required fields are completed
        and data in correct format and if it is valid will be saved to the database.
    5.​ The updated animal information is then available for adopters to view and matching
        algorithms to use.
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

The system will also use logical decision making. For example, if the username or password is
incorrect, the user cannot access their account. If required questionnaires fields are left blank,
the system should display an error message. In the compatibility scoring algorithm, if an animal
cannot live with children and the adopter has children then the compatibility score should
decrease. If an animal requires a garden and the adopter has one then the score should
increase.
This also shows that my system will use sequencing, selection, validation, iteration and
sorting. It is not simply just displaying the animal profiles but processing data logically to
produce suitable recommendations.
                    Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


Research - Approach and Objectives

I will take a structured approach to my research by using both primary and
secondary research in order to understand the problem from different
perspectives and ensure my final system meets user needs and expectations:
  1.​ I will inspect existing adoption websites, analysing their design, structure,
     features and adoption process, while looking at features I may want to
     include or avoid.
  2.​ I will conduct an interview with my client (Matilde) to get a better
     understanding of what she wants within this project, and reflect this in
     the design of my system.
  3.​ I will carry out a stakeholder survey to find out more about their
     preferences. I will use google forms and this will help me see if my
     problem is important and worth solving, and will help me in developing
     parts of the system such as the questionnaire.
  4.​ I will assess the different technologies that can be used to produce my
     application.
  5.​ I will identify software and hardware requirements for my project to run
     effectively.


My research objectives are:
  1.​ Understand current problems with adoption systems.
  2.​ Identify which information needs to be stored about each animal
  3.​ Identify which information needs to be collected from adopters
  4.​ Find out what factors are most important when matching an adopter to an
     animal
  5.​ Understand and take inspiration from existing adoption websites
  6.​ Understand user expectations for the interface
  7.​ Use the research findings to help decide the final features and
     requirements of my system
                        Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




Research of Competitors

Example 1 - Dogs Trust
Dogs trust ‘offer practical solutions and support to help owners and dogs stay together
wherever possible’ (Dogs Trust, 2026). They allow users to complete an application form
which describes their home, lifestyle and preferences. Staff at the adoption home then
compare applications with suitable dogs.
Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465
                       Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




Positives                                       Negatives
Dog profiles display clear information about    The system only supports dogs so people
the dog such as the age, gender, breed, size,   interested in different animals must use
location and whether the dog can live with      another service.
children.

The profile also includes the dogs           Users are not immediately told how well
personality, behaviour and required home     they match. Especially as suitability is
environment. This helps the user with        assessed manually, so users have to wait.
making a decision on how the dog acts rather
than from looks.

Users only have to complete the application     The system does not explain which
once rather than for each dog                   individual requirements the adopter meets or
                                                fails to meet

Users can add up to four favourite dogs.        The user must select a particular rehoming
                                                centre and be able to travel there when a
                                                match is found

Applications remain active for three months,    Not every available dog is shown on the
so the user can be considered for dogs that     website meaning users cannot browse the
arrive later.                                   complete set of possible matches themselves
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


 Dogs are assessed by behavioral and              The bright yellow colour may be distracting
 veterinary staff before being matched,           and make it harder to read.
 making the final decision more credible.

 There is a strong yellow, black and white        The large photo graphs and sections mean
 colour scheme making their branding              that only a small amount of information is
 recognisable.                                    visible at once, so users must scroll
                                                  frequently.

 Large photographs are used for each dog to       Some pages are very long and contain
 make it more appealing to adopt                  several sections such as the ‘About us’ page,
                                                  which may feel overwhelming.

 There is plenty of white space between           The similar appearance of every dog card
 sections, preventing pages from appearing        may make results look repetitive.
 cluttered

 Important buttons such as apply to adopt         On smaller screens, the large images and
 and add to favourites stand out.                 vertically arranged content could require
                                                  significantly more scrolling.



IMPACT ON MY SOLUTION
Dogs trust has influenced me to collect information about the adopters home, lifestyle and
preferences only once and reuse it when comparing with different animals. I will also create
similar animal cards which have detailed information about each animal. It will also contain
another section with personality, behavior and home requirements.
However, my system will differ as it allows for many different species and will automatically
give partial feedback whether they are suitable, but ultimately leave the final decision to staff.
They have also influenced me to use a consistent colour scheme, clear headings with organised
animal cards. I will make buttons easy to identify.
I will avoid bright colours, long pages and make mine less overwhelming and simple to use.




Example 2 - RSPCA
                        Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

The RPSCA Find a pet website allows a user to search for several different types of animals. Its
pages use photographs, clear heading and separate content sections to present animal
information.
                     Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




Positives                                    Negatives
Large animal photographs make the website    Applications are all reviewed manually by
visually appealing and immediately attract   staff. The user does not receive an immediate
users' attention.                            result and should normally wait up to
                                             48hours for a response. (Although this may
                       Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


                                                vary between branches)



The colour scheme fonts and button styles       The website contains many navigation
remain consistent which allows the website      options as it covers more than adoption,
to appear professional                          which may overwhelm some users. The
                                                number of filters and controls may make the
                                                search area appear crowded.

They support a wide range of species,           Some sections which are important and not
rabbits, hamsters, guinea pigs. This is more    important have a similar appearance which
similar to what I want within my system as it   may make it hard to show what is important
doesn't just support cats and dogs.             and allow it to stand out.

Each animal has an individual profile           Some important details are only available
explaining needs, allowing adopters to          after opening the full animal profile.
consider suitability before applying.
Applications also are reviewed by trained
staff meaning factors for a computer to
assess still can be considered.

They also have a feature for support after      It may be hard to objectively analyse if they
adoption, including behaviour services and      are suitable for the animal due to the lack of
pet care advice. This also could reduce         numeracy.
chances of adoption failing after the animal
entered a new home.

RSPCA may suggest alternative animals           Procedures and costs may differ between
when the selected animal is unsuitable.         RSPCA centres and branches, which does
                                                not allow for consistency which may confuse
                                                the user.

Search controls and filters are clearly         The published process requires applications
labelled helping users understand what          to be started from an animal's profile. This
information they need to enter.                 may cause users to repeat parts of the
                                                process when interested in another animal.

Information is divided into sections with       Some centres only allow people to view
headings, helping users distinguish between     animals by appointment after choosing a pet,
different types of context.                     this reduces the ability to visit freely and
                                                compare animals in person before applying.


IMPACT ON MY SOLUTION
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

The RSPCA has influenced me to support a wide range of animal species and organise them
into clear categories.I may include simple species categories, but the main method of finding
suitable animals will be the compatibility questionnaire and ranked recommendations. It has
also inspired me with its layout and visual design. I like its consistent color scheme with clear
headings.
However, unlike the RSPCA, my system will calculate a numerical suitability score, explaining
which requirements have and have not been met. It will also use a simpler navigation system
focused solely on adoption, preventing users from becoming overwhelmed.




Example 3 - PetFinder
Pet finder is my closest competitor to my proposed system as it provides a short adopter
questionnaire, and the system displays compatible pets. This website also includes a “See how
you match” option. Animal listings contain information of the dogs such as age, housetrained
ability and whether it can live with other animals. Users can also favourite animals.
Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465
                       Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




Positives                                        Negatives
The search filters allow users to quickly        The large number of filters and listings could
narrow down the large number of available        overwhelm some users.
animals

Animal cards are very clear and display a        It may not be as colourful and bright as the
photo and important information such as the      other examples.
name, age and breed

The animal profiles are detailed and show        The automated matching appears to focus
information about the personality, medical       mainly on cats and dogs rather than equal
needs and compatibility with children or         support for every species.
other pets.

Users can save animals as favourites so they     A visible suitability percentage is not
can return to them later.                        provided making it harder for users to
                                                 compare matches

The adopter questionnaire can provide more       Information can be incomplete or marked as
personalised recommendations then a basic        ‘unknown’ as each shelter is responsible for
search.                                          entering its own animal data

Important actions such as ‘start your enquiry’   The rescue organisation may ask the user to
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


 and ‘see how you match’ are clearly labelled     complete another official application, causing
 and easy to identify, allowing ease of use for   information to be entered more than once.
 the user.                                        This also may mean the information provided
                                                  may be inconsistent as different rescue
                                                  organisations manage their own listings.

 Pet finder brings listings from thousands of     Several actions appear on the same profile,
 different shelters and rescues into one          including enquiring, matching and
 website.                                         sponsoring which may compete for users
                                                  attention.

 Data can be saved by creating a login.           Some less important promotional content
                                                  may distract users from main adoption
                                                  features.

 Bold headings divide profiles into clear         As individual shelters manage their own
 sections such as behavior, health                listings, an animal's availability may not be
 compatibility and adoption information.          updated immediately. Users might need to
                                                  contact the shelter to confirm whether an
                                                  animal is still available which may be an
                                                  inconvenience for the user.



IMPACT ON MY SOLUTION
Petfinders system has strongly influenced the design of my system. I am inspired how the
survey is divided into clear manageable questions rather than displaying a long form at once. I
will use a similar step by step structure with clearly labelled answer options and progress
indicator so the user knows how much of the questionnaire remains. I also like how it compares
the adopters' preferences with animal characteristics in a clear table with visual symbols to
show if each factor is compatible.
However, my system will provide more detailed feedback by displaying a numerical
compatibility score and explaining which animal requirements have and have not been met.
This will allow the several animals to be compared more objectively.




Overall Conclusion
My research shows that each competitor contains useful features, but none fully have all the
requirements I want for my own system. Considering the design of dogs' trust, it has a
recognisable and consistent interface where the information is presented very clearly. Dogs
trust has a thorough application process even though it is only for dogs and does not provide
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

immediate feedback. However, the frequent bright yellow may be visually distracting and long
pages which can require excessive scrolling.
The RSPCA supports several species and organises animals into clear categories, but users
must browse and select an animal before suitability is assessed. Their professional colour
scheme makes it very recognisable and trustworthy, which may make people more intrigued to
adopt. However because the website contains services beyond adoption, its navigation can
appear crowded and some important information may not stand out. Users will not be given
instant or numerical feedback as they browse for an animal then begin the application. Only
after staff are able to manually assess the suitability.
Petfinder is the closest competitor to my proposed system as it uses an adopter questionnaire
and compares the users preferences with individual animals. However, it does not provide a
clear numerical score making it harder to compare with many animals. Information may also be
inconsistent because individual rescue organisations maintain their own animal records.
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




                                 Client Interview

    1.​ What factors do people fail to consider before adopting an animal?
“I think a lot of people choose animals based on how cute they are without thinking how much
work they can be. They often forget to consider things like how much space they have, how
much time they can spend with their animal, how much it costs to look after, and whether they
have experience caring for that type of animal. Some people also do not think about whether
their home is suitable for the animals needs.”
​
    2.​ What information should be stored about each animal?
“Each animal should have basic information such as its name, age, breed, species, sex and a
photo of the animal. It can also contain an extra information section such as personality,
medical conditions, exercise needs, whether it gets along with children or other pets and
special requirements other adopters should know about.”


    3.​ How should the system respond if the user is not suitable for the particular animal?
“ I don't think the system should completely stop someone from adopting an animal, but it
should warn them they might not be a good match. It should explain which requirements they
don't meet and recommend other animals. This helps people make better decisions and reduce
chances of animals ending up in the wrong home, but also not diverting people from adopting.”


    4.​ Do you think users should be able to apply for adoption directly through the
       system?
“No, I don't think users should be able to apply for adoption directly through the system.
Although the system can help identify suitable animals, I still think adoption agencies should
still carry out further checks in person. If staff are able to meet the adopter face-to-face they
can assess personality, commitment and understanding of responsibility in owning a pet. It
should aid the original process not completely take over that decision”


    5.​ What key tasks should the staff have on their side of the system?
“The key features the staff should have is being able to add, edit and remove animal records,
update animal information, upload photos and mark animals as available and unavailable for
adoption by deleting. The database should also be kept up to date.”
                            Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465



   6.​ What features would make the system easy to use for both staff and adopters?
“I think the main thing is that it should be simple and not confusing. People should be able to
find what they are looking for quickly without clicking through loads of pages. It should be
easy to browse animals and use the questionnaire, and for staff it should be straightforward to
update animal information. Clear buttons, a clean layout and simple instructions.”


   7.​ What features should be displayed on the homepage?
“I think the homepage should show information about how the adoption process works and a
button to complete the questionnaire. The homepage should be welcoming and make it clear
what the website is for.”


   8.​ Should users be able to search for animals, if so what filters should be available?
“Yes I think users should be able to search for animals as it makes it much easier to find a
suitable pet. Filter categories could be the type of animal, breed, age, size and activity level,
but mainly type of animal and size.”


   9.​ What information should users provide when creating an account?
“Basic information such as name, email, address, phone number and a password when creating
an account. You could also include the age to ensure they are old enough to adopt the animal.”


   10.​ Should some factors have a greater impact on the compatibility algorithm than
       others and if so which factors?
“Yes I think some factors should matter more than others. Things like available space, allergies
and whether there are young children in the house should have a bigger impact. For example, if
someone is allergic to cats, they should not be strongly matched with a cat, even if the rest of
their answers are suitable. Less serious factors such as preferred age or breed, should not be
considered as important as the animals safety and wellbeing.”


   11.​ Do you want the website to look a specific way? Any colours, fonts etc. It would
       also help if you gave specific examples of apps you like
“I would like the website to have a cute and friendly look rather than it being too serious. Soft
pink and pastel colours would make it feel more welcoming and enjoyable to use. I think the
design should be simple but visually appealing, with lots of photos of the animals and clear
buttons. The main thing is that it feels approachable and encourages people to engage with
the adoption process.”


   12.​ Do you have any security concerns regarding the app?
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

“Yes, I think security is important because the system will store users' accounts and animal
records. Passwords should be protected, and only staff should be able to add, edit or delete
animal information. Regular users should only be able to browse animals and complete
questionnaires, not change anything in the database.”


   13.​ Which devices do you want it to work on?
“I want the system to work on both laptop and desktop computers, as these will be mostly
used by adoption agency staff.”


   14.​What should happen after a user receives their compatibility results?
“I think the system should show users the results in a clear way and provide them with more
information about any animals that are a good match. What happens after that would depend
on how the adoption agency wants to use the system.”


   15.​Are there any features that you believe are essential for the success of this system?
“The compatibility scoring system is probably the most important feature as it helps match
animals with suitable owners. Additionally, the animal profiles need to be detailed and up to
date so the users will have all the information they need before making a decision”


Overall, the client interview provided valuable insight into the function and design
requirements for this system. The client identified that many people fail to consider factors
such as available space, time commitment, allergies and previous experience before adopting
an animal. Therefore, these factors will be incorporated into the compatibility questionnaire
and scoring algorithm. The compatibility algorithm should use weighted factors so that
important requirements such as allergies, children, other pets and living space have a greater
impact than softer preferences such as preferred breed or age. The client also highlighted the
importance of maintaining and up to date detailed animal profiles and providing staff with
ability to edit, add and remove animals through an administrative interface. For the design, the
client wants a simple, easy to use interface with clear navigation, animal photographs and soft
pastel colours to make it a friendly interface. The client also is very focused on security
ensuring only staff can change details within the database regarding the animals.
                        Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


Stakeholder Survey
This stakeholder survey received 27 responses, which gave me feedback from a range of
potential users.
QUESTIONS:


   1.​ Have you ever owned a pet before?
   A.​ Yes
   B.​ No


   2.​ If you did own a pet, did you adopt it from a centre?
   A.​ Yes
   B.​ No
   C.​ N/A


   3.​ How would you normally choose a pet?
   A.​ Appearance
   B.​ Personality
   C.​ Breed
   D.​ Lifestyle Compatibility
   E.​ Advice from experts


   4.​ How important do you think it is to research an animal before adopting?
   A.​ Very Important
   B.​ Important
   C.​ Neither
   D.​ Not Important
   E.​ Not very important


   5.​ Which factors do you think should be considered when matching an animal to an
       adopter? (Select many)
   A.​ Living Space
   B.​ Garden Access
   C.​ Income
   D.​ Experience with animals
   E.​ Time available
   F.​ Presence of Children
   G.​ Other pets
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465



  6.​ How important is it that an adoption website is easy to use?
  A.​ Very important (1)
  B.​ Slightly important (5)


  7.​ Would a compatibility score influence your decision when adopting an animal?
  A.​ Yes
  B.​ No


  8.​ Do you think adoption agencies should use a compatibility scoring system?
  A.​ Yes
  B.​ No


  9.​ How concerned are you about the welfare of adopted animals?
  A.​ Concerned (1)
  B.​ Not Concerned (5)


RESPONSES:



  1.​




        Analysis:
        44.4% of respondents said yes, while 55.6% said no. This shows that my survey
        consists of a mixture of people with and without pet ownership experience. This is
        useful as my system needs to be able to support experienced and inexperienced
                      Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

      adopters. This means the system should not assume that users will already understand
      animal care or adoption requirements.




2.​




      Analysis:
      These results show that very few respondents have experience adopting from an
      adoption centre. This means my solution should clearly explain the adoption process
      and avoid making it confusing for users who have no experience.



3.​
                       Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




      Analysis:
      The most common answer was lifestyle compatibility, chosen by 48.1% of respondents.
      This shows most users already do care about which animal fits their lifestyle rather
      than just how the animal looks, even though a few care about the aesthetics of the
      animal. This will allow my system to be suitable for those looking to adopt.




4.​
                      Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

      Analysis:
      63% of respondents said it was very important, and 33.3% said it was important. This
      means that 96.3% of respondents agreed that research is important before adopting an
      animal. This supports my idea that websites should include detailed animal
      information.



5.​




      Analysis:
      The most selected factors were living space at 88.9% and time available at 85.2%
      showing that respondents think an adopters environment and lifestyle are the most
      important parts of a successful match. Income and garden access were also highly
      chosen showing that practical care needs should be considered primarily.


6.​
                       Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




      Analysis:
      Most responses were grouped around the higher end of the scale, which suggests that
      ease of use is important to users. As a result, I would like my website to have a simple
      layout, clear navigation, readable text and easy process. I aim to make it as accessible
      as possible.



7.​




      Analysis:
      77.8% of respondents said yes and 22.2% said no. This shows that most users may
      find a compatibility score helpful when deciding whether an animal would be suitable
      for them.
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

8.​




      Analysis:
      70.4% of respondents said yes, while 29.6% said no. This shows that respondents
      support the idea of adoption centres using this scoring system, but not everyone
      agrees. Therefore the compatibility score should be used as a guidance but not as the
      deciding factor.



9.​




      Analysis:
      The largest group of respondents selected 1, with 48.1% and 18.5% selected 2. This
      shows that many respondents are concerned about animal welfare. This supports the
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

       purpose of this system as it aims to reduce unsuitable adoptions by helping users find
       animals and reduce chances of animals being placed in unsuitable homes.


Overall:
Overall, the survey shows that there is a clear need for a pet adoption system that helps users
make informed decisions. Most respondents have shown that they agree that research is
important before adopting an animal, and would be influenced by the compatibility score. This
survey also shows that the important factors include living space, time available, income,
garden access and experience with animals.


My solution should include detailed animal profiles, a user questionnaire with a compatibility
scoring system, where lifestyle compatibility will be the most important and popular factor in
choosing an animal. This system should also be easy to use as users will have different levels
of experiences with pet ownership and adoption.


However, one limitation of this survey is that it only received 27 responses, so it may not
represent all potential adopters, and some respondents may have limited experience with
adoption centres. It still provided me with guidance about common user expectations,
especially importance of ease of use, animal welfare and compatibility scoring.
This survey was insightful to help me understand what potential users would expect from an
animal adoption system, especially the need for clear information, lifestyle based matching and
a compatibility score.
                               Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




       Prefixes: E—Examples | Q—Client Interview|S—Stakeholder Survey


                                              Features

#   Feature                Notes                                Justification                         Source
1   Clean user interface   Calm colour scheme, clear            Makes system easier to                S6, E3, E1,
                           headings, identifiable buttons and   understand and use, especially for    E2
                           a clear layout                       those not confident with
                                                                technology

2   Navigation bar         Allows users to move between         Competitor websites used simple       E1, E2, E3,
    across different       pages easily                         navigation, which helps reduce        S6
    pages                                                       confusion and makes system more
                                                                user friendly

3   User Home page         This system will include a clear     Simple starting point, and helps      E1, E2, E3
                           home page introducing the            user understand system is focused
                           purpose of adoption matching         on adoption suitability rather than
                           system                               browsing animals

4   Animal preview         Users will be able to view           Compact cards will make it easier     E1, E2, E3
    Page                   available animals using compact      for users to compare animals
                           animal cards. Each card will show    without needing to open every
                           key information such as name,        profile individually
                           species, breed, age and image.

5   Animal Profile Page    Each animal will have a detailed     The client stated that the animal     Q2, E1, E2
                           profile page containing              profiles should show key details
                           information such as name, species,   about the animal, which is also
                           breed, age, sex, personality,        required for the matching
                           medical needs, exercise need and     algorithm
                           suitability requirements

6   Multi Species          Animals will be organised by         The RSPCA also has different          E1, E2
    Categories             species such as dogs, cats and       animal categories, whereas dogs
                           rabbits                              trust is just based around dogs.

7   Adopter                Users complete a questionnaire       The client stated that adopters       Q1, S4, S5
                                Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


     Questionnaire          about their lifestyle and animal       often fail to consider important
                            experience and will include many       factors before adopting, this will
                            other answers which will               allow them to reflect on their
                            contribute to the compatibility        suitability before decisions are
                            scoring algorithm.                     made.

8    Step by step           This questionnaire will be split       This makes the process easier to     E3, S6
     questionnaire layout   question by question instead of        complete and reduces the chance
                            being displayed as one long form,      of users feeling overwhelmed.
                            with dropdown options.

9    Input Validation       To check if data that is required is   Preventing the incomplete or         Q15, S8
                            not left blank and the data is         incorrect data being used by the
                            valid.                                 matching algorithm,
                                                                   recommendations more reliable

10   Compatibility          The system will compare the            The main computational feature,      E3, S7,
     scoring algorithm      adopter's answers with each            allows animals to be                 Q10
                            animals requirements and               recommended on suitability
                            calculate a numerical score.

11   Ranked animal          After the questionnaire is             Removes need for user to             Q14
     recommendations        submitted, animals will be             manually search through every
                            displayed in order from most           animal
                            suitable to least suitable

12   Requirements           The system will show which             Helps users understand why an        E3, Q3
     Breakdown              requirements the adopters meet         animal has received a particular
                            and which requirements they do         score.
                            not meet for each animal.

13   Unsuitable match       If the user does not meet the          The client said the system should    Q3
     warning                requirements, the system will          not completely stop a user from
                            display a clear warning                adoption but warn them if they
                                                                   are unsuitable and why

14   User registration      Users can create an account by         Users can save progress, access      Q9
     system                 registering with personal details      their questionnaire and
                            such as name, email and                personalise their own experience
                            password

15   User and Admin         Registered users will be able to       User login ensures data is only      Q12
     Login and Logout       securely login and logout their        accessible to the correct user and
     system                 accounts and staff can login           admin login prevents normal user
                            Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


                        securely to access management          from changing animal records and
                        side of the system                     protects accuracy over database

16   Admin animal       Admins should be able to add,          Animal information should be      Q5
     management         edit and delete animal records         kept up to date when new animals
                                                               arrive, details change or animals
                                                               are adopted

17   Database Storage   System will need to have a             So data can be stored, searched,    Q15
                        database alongside to store            updated and used by the
                        animal records, user accounts,         matching algorithm
                        admin login details and adopter
                        questionnaire details

18 Responsive           I will use Streamlit layout tools so   This makes system easier to use     Q6, E1,
   streamlit design     pages remain clear on different        on different laptops or tablets     E2, E3, S6
                        screen sizes.                          without information being cut off
                                                               or difficult to read
                          Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


          Hardware and Software Requirements
The technology used to build this system is based on the features that my client requires. The
list of requirements is as follows:
   -​ Clean user interface
   -​ User registration and login
   -​ Admin login
   -​ Database storage for animal records, user accounts and questionnaire answers
   -​ CRUD functionality for admins
   -​ Input validation
   -​ Compatibility scoring algorithm
   -​ Ranked animal recommendations
For this project, I will develop my system on my Macbook, which has the required hardware
and software capabilities to develop, run and test my system.



Developer
Hardware:
Device: Macbook Air, 13 Inch, M3 2024
Processor: Apple M3 Chip
RAM: 8GB
Display: I will use the 13.6 inch built in retina display alongside a 13 inch monitor
Input: Keyboard and Trackpad
Internet Connection: This is required in order to install packages, access documentation and
test deployment.
This hardware is suitable as my system will not require advanced graphics processing or a
powerful server. The main processing will be form input, database queries, validation and the
algorithm, which is perfectly suited for my laptop.


Software:
Operating system: MacOS Sequoia 15.0
IDE: Visual studio code
Programming Language: Python
User interface framework: Streamlit
Database: SQLLite
Database module: sqlite3
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

Browser: Chrome
I will use some additional libraries such as pandas which may be used to organise and display
data in tables.


I have chosen python as my main programming language as it is the one i am most confident
in, therefore I will not have to spend as much time trying to learn another language when
python is suitable enough. It is suitable to create the matching algorithm, validating user inputs
and all the functionalities my system requires. It allows me to be more efficient and focus on
the computational parts of the system such as the comparison between adopter answers and
animal requirements producing compatibility scores.


For my user and admin interface I will be using streamlit. It is simpler to use than using tkinter
and it provides built in tools such as buttons, forms, dropdowns, columns, containers and page
navigation. This allows me to create the pages without using a full HTML, CSS and JS website.


For data storage I will use SQLite as it is what I have the most experience in. It is suitable and
easy to use to store data required for my system such as animal records, user accounts, admin
login details, questionnaire answers and compatibility results.


User + Admins
My product will be a streamlit application, so users and admins will only require a device that
accesses the system through any web browser., If deployed online, users will require an
internet connection and they do not need to install any modules. They could access from a
laptop, desktop computer or tablet, which may require a mouse, keyboard and a monitor to
present the graphical user interface or even touchscreen if using a tablet.
                          Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




                                     Limitations
The system will be built in order for one specific animal shelter rather than a large organisation
such as the RSPCA. This means that the database will only need to store the animals, users
and admin accounts linked to that shelter. This is a large limitation as creating a system for
multiple shelters would require extra features such as shelter admin accounts and location
based searching and overall a larger database structure. This will be extremely difficult with
the experience I have and would increase the complexity of my project. Furthermore, this
would make development and testing less realistic within the time available.


The system will only be focusing on common adoption animals such as dogs, cats and rabbits
rather than every possible species. This is due to different animals having different care
requirements, and every possible animal would make the matching algorithm too broad and
difficult to test within the time available. By focusing on a smaller number of species it will
allow the compatibility algorithm to be more accurate and relevant. More species could be
added within the future by expanding the animal requirements stored in the database.


Additionally the compatibility score is only there to provide guidance and will not replace the
core decision making of adoption staff within the centre. Although it's able to compare
adopters answers it will not be able to take in external factors such as personal circumstance
or behavioural detail. It will also not be able to receive evidence to match their answers on the
questionnaire. Therefore, the final adoption decision is made by staff, whilst the questionnaire
is a guide in order to help those looking to adopt make a better decision.


The system will also not be able to complete the full adoption process as it cannot handle
legal contracts, home checks, payments and final adoption approval. This would require more
security, data protection and verification processes which widens the scope increasing
development time. My system's main focus is helping users consider suitability before choosing
an animal.


I cannot ensure the accuracy of the recommendations will be perfect every time, but rather
they depend on the users answering the questionnaire honestly. If a user gives inaccurate
answers on the questionnaire it will not reflect their true suitability. I will try to reduce this by
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465

using clear wording and validation but it cannot fully prevent users from entering inaccurate
information.


The matching algorithm is rule based rather than using AI or ML. As a rule based algorithm is
easier to explain, test and justify within the project. It will also be clearer to break down and
show a user why an animal has or has not been recommended to the users. Additionally,
machine learning would require a large dataset of previous adoptions which is not realistic for
this project.


Animal records will need to be updated manually by admin users. This may lead to
inconsistencies, or animals showing available when they are not. This is not something I can
control but rather within the staff's responsibility to add edit and delete records so the
database can be kept up to date.


Some advanced features such as animations, live chats would not be included and some of the
formatting and design will be simplified. It would increase development and testing time
without improving the main purpose of the system.
                   Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




    Prefixes: E—Examples | Q—Client Interview|S—Stakeholder Survey



                         Success Criteria
#      Feature                        Requirements                                 Source
                      Pages must use a calm colour scheme, clear headings     S6, E1, E2, E3
                                   and identifiable buttons

     Navigation        The interface must remain readable on laptop and       Q6, S6
1    and Clean
                                      tablet sized screens

                      The system must include a navigation menu to access     E1, E2, E3, S6
         user          home page, animal preview page, profile page, and
      interface                           login page

                      The menu and interface style must remain consistent     E1, E2, E3, S6
                                     across all the pages

                       Should explain the purpose of the animal adoption      Q1, Q3, E1, E2, E3
                      matching system, especially including that the system
                       focuses on suitability rather than only appearance
     Home Page
2                     Should have a clear button or navigation option that
                      directs users to complete the adoption questionnaire
                                                                              Q1, S5, S6




3
                      The page should display every available animal using    E1, E2, E3
       Animal                       compact animal cards
       preview
                      Each card should show the species, name, breed, age     Q2, E1, E2
        page                              and image

                       The system must support at least 3 animal species      E2
                                including dogs, cat and rabbits

                      Users must be able to open a full animal profile from   E1, E2, E3
                                      the preview page

                      Each profile must display the animals name, species,    E1, E2, Q2
      Animal                          breed, age and sex
                      Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465




4
                           Each profile also must include personality, medical     Q2
       Profile             needs, exercise needs and suitability requirements


        Page             Animal profile information must be retrieved from the
                                               database
                                                                                   Q15


                          Users must be able to return to the animal preview       S6, E1, E2, E3
                                        page or results page


     User and Users    must be able to create an account, using name,
                 email and password and it can include other features
                                                                           Q9, Q12


      Admin         such as age to ensure they are at a suitable age

5               The system must reject registration if required fields are Q12, Q15
    registration empty and the email format is invalid, by validating
     and login                            inputs

                Registered users must be able to login and logout using Q12
       page                   their correct account details

                         The admin login details should allow admins to access     Q12, Q5
                              their own section with the CRUD interface

                         Incorrect Login details must display an error message     Q12, S6
                                   and prevent access to the account

                         The questionnaire must collect information about the      Q1, S5
                          users home, lifestyle, garden access, children, other
                          pets, time available and previous animal experience

6    Adopter              The questionnaire must be split into clear sections or
                         individual questions rather than appearing as one long
                                                                                   E3, S6

    Questionnair                                  form
      e Page               The questionnaire must use suitable input methods       E3, S6
                          such as dropdowns, radio buttons or selection boxes
                                      but preferably dropdowns.

                         The system must prevent the questionnaire from being      Q15, S8
                           submitted if important questions are unanswered

                         The system must compare adopters questionnaire with       Q10, Q1, S5
                                     each animals requirements

                          The system must calculate a numerical compatibility      Q10, S7
                                       score for each animal
                    Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465


                         The top 4 animals must be displayed from highest        Q14, S7
                            compatibility score to lowest at a minimum

         Results and    The results page must show which key requirements        Q3, E3
7     recommendation     the user meets and does not meet for each animal

           s page      The system must display a warning if the user does not    Q3
                             meet important requirements for an animal

                        The results page must explain that the compatibility     Q3
                        scores are guidance and the adoption staff have the
                                             final say

                          This page should be accessed separately with a         Q12
                                      separate admin login
        Admin          Admin users must be able to add a new animal record       Q5, Q2
      managemen                 with all the information required

        t page            Admin users must be able to edit existing animal       Q5, Q15

8                         records and save the updated information to the
                                             database

                         Admin users must be able to delete animal records       Q5
                           when animals adopted or no longer available

                         Normal users must not be able to access the admin       Q12
                                       management page

                       The database must store animal records, user account      Q15
                       details, admin login details and questionnaire answers

                       The database must allow animal records to be added,       Q5, Q15
                       viewed, edited and deleted through the admin system

  Databas Questionnaire answers must be stored or processed so Q10, Q15

9           that they can be used by the compatibility scoring

  e system                      algorithm

                       Data must be retrieved correctly so animal profiles and   Q15, Q2, Q10
                          recommendations display accurate information




    References
                         Animal Adoption and Maintenance Tool | Sienna Sisodia | 4465



BBC News (2024) RSPCA receives record number of animal cruelty reports. Available at:
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/cwyrnlj5632o (Accessed: 19 June 2026).

Dogs Trust (n.d.) About us. Available at: https://www.dogstrust.org.uk/about-us (Accessed: 25
June 2026).

Dogs Trust (n.d.) How to adopt a dog. Available at:
https://www.dogstrust.org.uk/rehoming/how-to-adopt (Accessed: 25 June 2026).

Petfinder (n.d.) Adopter profile: Finding your perfect pet. Available at:
https://www.petfinder.com/pet-adopter-profile/ (Accessed: 25 June 2026).

Petfinder (n.d.) Pet Finder Quiz. Available at: https://www.petfinder.com/user/profile/create/
(Accessed: 25 June 2026).

RSPCA (n.d.) Find a pet. Available at: https://www.rspca.org.uk/findapet (Accessed: 25 June
2026).

RSPCA (n.d.) Pet adoption process guide. Available at:
https://www.rspca.org.uk/findapet/adopt (Accessed: 25 June 2026).
